---
layout: post
title: Center Church (Keller, 2012)
author: Keelan Cook
tags: missions theology

---

---
**Citation:** Timothy Keller. *Center Church: Doing Balanced, Gospel-Centered Ministry in Your City*. Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 2012. (pp. 88-247).

---

## Summary
### Introduction: Theological Vision
In Center Church, Tim Keller takes on the bold task of developing a theological vision for urban mission. Keller notes that there is an often neglected step between the formation of doctrine and the practice of the church. This middle ground between orthodoxy and orthopraxy is the world of applied theology, and Keller’s central concern in this work is laying an applied theological foundation for the ministry of the church in our rapidly urbanizing world. In order to accomplish this goal Keller considers three broad topics: the central doctrine of the Christian faith, the gospel; the context of ministry, the city; and then the means and methods of ministry. Keller warns that attention must be given to theology and context to create formative missiological method. For Keller, Center Church, is his attempt to do more than survey topics of theology and culture, but to consider them in a way that leads to a method.

<!--more-->

It is imperative to consider the message, the context, and means in which those two interact. Keller utilizes spectrums throughout his works to describe the balance that must occur concerning each of his major topics of discussion. Keller notes, “There is a tendency either to overcontextualize to the city (which usually leads to weakening or relativizing a church’s commitment to orthodoxy) or to undercontextualize (which leads to inward-facing churches that reach only certain kinds of people and fail to advance a movement of the gospel in the community)” (20).

Finally, in his introduction Keller, writes of the priority of cities in contemporary mission. “We believe ministry in the center of global cities is the highest priority for the church in the twenty-first century,” states Keller (21). Thus, this work is more than a book on doctrine, and it is more than a book on culture and contextualization. It is no less than either of these things, but it also serves as a manual for the contemporary church concerning faithful mission in the urban context.

### Gospel
In Center Church, Tim Keller takes on the bold task of developing a theological vision for urban mission. Keller notes that there is an often neglected step between the formation of doctrine and the practice of the church. This middle ground between orthodoxy and orthopraxy is the world of applied theology, and Keller’s central concern in this work is laying an applied theological foundation for the ministry of the church in our rapidly urbanizing world. In order to accomplish this goal Keller considers three broad topics: the central doctrine of the Christian faith, the gospel; the context of ministry, the city; and then the means and methods of ministry. Keller warns that attention must be given to theology and context to create formative missiological method. For Keller, Center Church, is his attempt to do more than survey topics of theology and culture, but to consider them in a way that leads to a method.

It is imperative to consider the message, the context, and means in which those two interact. Keller utilizes spectrums throughout his works to describe the balance that must occur concerning each of his major topics of discussion. Keller notes, “There is a tendency either to overcontextualize to the city (which usually leads to weakening or relativizing a church’s commitment to orthodoxy) or to undercontextualize (which leads to inward-facing churches that reach only certain kinds of people and fail to advance a movement of the gospel in the community)” (20).

Finally, in his introduction Keller, writes of the priority of cities in contemporary mission. “We believe ministry in the center of global cities is the highest priority for the church in the twenty-first century,” states Keller (21). Thus, this work is more than a book on doctrine, and it is more than a book on culture and contextualization. It is no less than either of these things, but it also serves as a manual for the contemporary church concerning faithful mission in the urban context.

### City
Keller’s next section moves to the context of ministry: the city. Again, Keller advocates for the priority of the city in contemporary missions. He paints a portrait of the city that leaves the reader inspired by its positive characteristics, strategic importance, and daunting challenges. He considers this context in three parts: (1) a thorough development of contextualization as a biblical and necessary practice in any context; (2) the need for what Keller calls a City Vision, which serves as a short biblical theology of the city; and (3) a discussion of cultural engagement as a vital part of urban mission.

Keller’s work includes an extensive treatment of contextualization. He starts by positing the imperative and inevitable nature of contextualization. It is not a matter of whether or not to contextualize, rather it is a matter of how well one contextualizes. Keller notes the twin ditches of overcontextualizing and undercontextualizing that plague much ministry. “Sound contextualization,” according to Keller, "means translating and adapting the communication and ministry of the gospel to a particular culture without compromising the essence and particulars of the gospel itself. Keller’s treatment of contextualization includes the historical development of the concept, a look at biblical materials concerning contextualization, and practical guidance for striking a proper balance in the urban context.

Central to Keller’s work is his theology of the city. In part 4, Keller builds this theology so that it can impact the methods of gospel ministry in the urban context. He spends two chapters tracing the city thread through the Old and New Testaments respectively, noting that the Bible portrays a tension in its view of the city. Early on the Bible provides a fairly negative view of the city, but as it develops this view evolves to demonstrate the importance of the city, and eventually ends with a view of the New Jerusalem as the center of restorative activity in the new creation. Keller then follows this with a call to the city, discussing the contemporary significance of the city for mission. His oft-quoted adage," “Cities, quite literally, have more of the image of God per square inch than any other place on earth,” makes its way into this section (141).

In Keller’s final part directed toward the city, he lays out a model for cultural engagement. Over the course of three chapters, he analyses the historical relationship of the church to culture and plots out four various approaches to this relation. These approaches are: (1) transformationalist, (2) relevance, (3) counterculturalist, and (4) the two kingdoms approach (Ch. 16). Keller critiques each model and creates a blended composite that pulls insights from each model.

### Movement
Keller finishes this thorough work with a section on gospel movement. The goal, he claims of Christian ministry is always beyond ourselves. He develops this line of reasoning by considering the missional church movement, building a model for integrative ministry, and discussing the dynamics of a movement both locally and regionally in a city. These movements, Keller claims, “do not follow a ‘bounded-set’ approach in which you only work with others who can sign off on nearly all your distinctive beliefs and practices. Rather it follows a ‘centered-set’ orientation in which you work most closely with those who face with you toward the same center” (250). The removes the temptation to religious or philosophical tribalism and actively works across certain boundaries in cooperative, gospel-centered spirit.

In part 6, Keller tackles the issue of the missional church movement. The term’s use is broad enough to evade clear definition, so Keller traces the historical development of the term. He then proposes four qualifiers that outline a missional community: (1) they are evangelistic, (2) they are incarnational, (3) they are contextual, and (4) they are reciprocal and communal (256-257). After setting parameters, Keller observes hurdles like being tethered to particular cultural forms or losing a clear understanding of the gospel. Keller’s ultimate goal is that churches will have a “missionary encounter” with their city (271). Chapter 21 is dedicated to equipping for this endeavor.

Keller’s understanding of integrative ministry requires connecting people on four fronts: (1) to God, (2) to one another, (3) to the city through mercy and justice, and (4) to the culture through integration of faith and work (293). These four fronts involve all the ministries of the church, from evangelism and missions to discipleship, community and service. In order to set the tone for this integrative ministry, Keller breaks down several important topics of the course of four chapters. He interacts with the false dichotomy between corporate worship that is directed toward God and concern for seeker sensitivity (301). He also addresses unexpected categories like catechesis and the examination of candidates for membership (316). Finally, he addresses service to the city through mercy ministry and displaying and proclaiming the gospel in the workplace.

In the final part of this section on movements, Keller addresses the church as an “organized organism” designed for movement (344). First, he challenges the common institutional notions of North American ministry and church planting models by comparing to movement models akin to international church planting theory. He does not pit these two against each other, rather he demonstrates that the church is an institution that is organized for movement. Keller spends a chapter focusing on church planting as the driving force behind a movement dynamic, and concludes the section discusses the interdependence of local churches in a city concerning the mission.

## Evaluation
Keller’s Center Church is perhaps the best work written in years developing demonstrating healthy theological and missiological method in a specific context. The work does more than posit a theology or methodology. Books on urban mission methods are numerous, but Keller does much more. He takes the reader from doctrine to practice and provides a transparent view of the development of vision and ultimately missiological method. There are few books that provide such a thorough resources for church practitioners today. Despite the dizzying array of topics, the outline of the book is clear and Keller guides the reader from concept to conclusion.

Perhaps the primary strength of the book is the thorough treatment given to foundational concepts. Keller addresses key concepts such as contextualization and the missional church movement by grounding them both in their historical development. Giving the reader this vital background explains the nuance necessary to approach both of these without falling into the common pitfalls. Keller does not assume this background for his reader, and his clear explanation is the fruit. Furthermore, his robust treatment of the gospel is of first importance and provides an excellent foundation for any applied theology. Finally, Keller’s theological vision of the city makes his work distinctly urban. His work connecting the gospel to the context of city plots a course for more than urban missions. It demonstrates good missiological method.

Keller’s weakest section deals with cultural engagement. Again, he does a strong job outlining the distinctions between views in the nature/grace conversations. Furthermore, his attempt at trying to pull out the best pieces of each is noble. Unfortunately, what results is an unclear representation of this relationship. There are foundational understandings behind each camp on this relationship that form their various approaches and simply picking the things one likes out of each does not produce a coherent approach. It is too simplistic to place transformationalism, counterculturalism, two kingdoms, and cultural relevance all on the same spectrum when the foundations of each are differing. The result leaves the reader wondering if Keller does think social transformation is the goal or if he just plays with the idea.

With that critique in mind, this work is one of the most helpful resources written for contemporary missions practitioners. Applications are numerous. In one sense, it is a tutor for constructing theological vision and relating social sciences and Scripture. In another sence, it is a clear manual in for the urban church planter of pastor. For any missions student, it does a sufficient job introducing the history of key missiological concepts such as contextualization that it is worthy of use for a survey of the field. For the missiologist, Keller’s Center Church is a literary Swiss Army knife.
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTY1Mjk4MTE3MF19
-->